---
lang: en
layout: post
category: books
author: Ajahn Nyanamoli Thero
title: Appointment with Death
---


### APPOINTMENT WITH DEATH

> “The world is undermined by death and limited by old age.
> 
> Affected by the thorn of craving, and perfumed with longing.”  
> —Thag 6:13

**Q: I was wondering if you could speak about the contemplation of death—how should we think about it?**

**Nyanamoli:** Walking, standing, sitting or lying down, you should be dwelling on the fact that you might die. That’s the ultimate context. That context is what death is. It’s the ultimate context of your life—it’s a non-negotiable context. People might think: “I must be going through the motions and methods of practising mindfulness of death, thinking about it when I’m walking, sitting.” That’s true only in the sense that you need to discern the most fundamental, always present possibility of death, which is what makes it such an ultimate context of your life. Everything else within your life can come and go—what has been or could have not been. But one thing is for sure: when life is there, death is implicit; it is guaranteed as the final outcome of it.

The reason why people are oppressed by their desires, burdened by their intentions and unskilful actions, is because they turn a blind eye to this very factual liability to death. Death that can come at any given moment. Pretty much everything unwholesome, that a person can engage in, is a result of ignoring the fact that they will die, that they will not always be healthy, not always be young. By being intoxicated by those things, you entertain your sense desires, you want more of them. But all you need do is uncover that fundamental context and accept the certainty of death, and that will automatically prevent you from running too far down the rabbit hole of desires. And that’s what mindfulness of death is.

Obviously, you can do this practice loosely, on a very low level. But you can also start expanding it and realize that death is so close you might not even see the end of this day. You don’t necessarily have to become neurotic about it, thinking “I will die, I will die.” But you do have to recognize that this possibility-of-death is so immediate that you might not see the end of the day—the end of the morning. You might not have enough time to finish your meal. You might not have enough time to breathe out once you breathe in. That’s how much you’re fundamentally not in control of your life. That doesn’t mean that you should be repeating to yourself that you will die every second of the day. That’s not contemplation of death, that’s just a mechanical repetition of the idea of what death is for you. You want to _understand_ that context of death, and not feel affected by it.

As for “mindfulness” of death—whenever there is a principle of mindfulness, there is a principle of _peripheral awareness_. By being mindful of the context of death with regard to your day-to-day life, that’s already the practice of peripheral awareness. In order to practice this contemplation correctly, a person will have to withdraw themselves from distractions, from company, and set some solitary time to start thinking about it. (Just like with any other meditation.) If you don’t know where to start, just think about the nature of death that is inescapable to you. Then you take that further and start thinking: “OK, so what would be the real significance of this life that is fully under the control of death?” Because whatever you do in this life cannot help you step outside of the _liability to death_. It cannot free you from death. That order cannot change—it doesn’t matter what you do, doesn’t matter what you distract yourself with, doesn’t matter what you accomplish in this life. Fundamentally that whole thing—as much as you developed it, as far as it proliferates— is still fully within the domain of death. You simply can’t change that. What you can do is _stop ignoring it_. The practice then would be in recognizing this “right order”, seeing what is more fundamental and what comes first so to speak. Whatever you do in this life will be _within_ your liability to sickness, ageing, and death. That context is something you need to keep at the back of your mind. You need to _know_ that: While I’m doing this or that, I might die. It’s highly unlikely that I will die as a result of sitting in my room reading a book, but death is equally present there because my life depends upon working organs, beating heart, breathing lungs. And those things can _never_ be in my control.

So, you want to see that your life is undermined by the random operation of organs inaccessible to your will power.

**Q: What about this example? It’s like someone who has chosen a job which requires them to be on call 24/7. Whatever they do has to be done with that in the back of their mind.**

**Nm:** That’s what I mean by context. It’s not a context you can be indifferent about, because it’s the context that undermines and affects your life. It’s a context that fills you with _concern_, as it should. That’s what the Buddha meant by “invoking the sense of urgency” for practice. The simile for this would be, for example, you have a job interview. You have one shot at something that can change your life in a week’s time. Whatever you do that week, this will be at the back of your mind because it is so important—there is a degree of concern with regard to it. Now imagine if that one shot is death—it’s not a random interview that can go either way, it’s as fundamental as losing your life. So, you realize what kind of concern that would be, peripherally, and how much influence that would exert on your choices and decisions during that week.

Also, you can have a job appointment at an exact time, exact day, but the appointment with death is uncertain in the sense that it can arise at any given time. That appointment might be today, might be tomorrow, might be in 10 years’ time. You cannot forget about it because it can be here the next moment and if you forget about it you might fail. Whatever you do in this life, you do it on the basis of not forgetting about the ultimate context of your liability to die. You don’t cover up the certainty of death. You can already see how much less you would be pulled by the fleeting desires of the senses, distractions and so on—they just would not have any value if you wouldn’t forget you’ll die.

If you have any doubt about it, just recollect when you feared for your life for a period of time, on account of anything: illness or an accident or whatever. Then see how much interest you had in the world during that period of time. Very little. You were not enjoying your food, you were not finding solace in friends and distractions or whatever else. This was the most pressing thing. So, it’s about reconnecting to that context that is always there, you don’t have to fabricate it, you just have to stop covering it up. And covering would stop if you would restrain the constant influx of sensuality and intentions towards distraction. Thus, if you always feel like you’re on call—called upon by death—that already means you are developing that proper context. And that context will now shape your other decisions. It will make you more careful about all things in your life.

This kind of practice can be a bit too intense for some people—the _concern_ revealed can overwhelm you. That’s why the virtue and sense restraint needs to be thoroughly developed beforehand. With it, you would rapidly develop dispassion towards everything in your life. And that’s why the Buddha praised it as the quickest way to free your mind from any unwholesome states, ignorance, avoidance of responsibility and so on. However, if it is too much, then you can practice mindfulness of breathing because it has the same result but is slower and more gradual. You can recollect that your fully controlled act of breathing depends on things that are not your own _while_ you’re breathing. This means that your sense of control is undermined and fundamentally dependent upon things you cannot control.

**Q: So, one of the most important things to keep in mind is that one has an appointment with death.**

**Nm:** Yes. Another thing to keep in mind is, if you think you are practising mindfulness of death and making the correct effort, then you should ask yourself: “Is my mind getting angry? Is my mind getting lustful?” If the answer is yes, it means you haven’t established the _context_ of death. If you had, these things would not be able to even arise—let alone persist.

The only way you can be triggered by various matters—the only way you could be emotionally affected by anything, is if you have lost sight of the context of death.

The practice of mindfulness of death is about clarifying the understanding of that inherent context in whatever you do. The context of that ultimate final cessation that you cannot even conceive escaping from. That’s because if you think about escaping from it, the thoughts of that escape are already within the context of death. You’re fully enclosed by it. That’s why it can be quite frightening, like being buried alive for example. You’re still alive, but you realize that escape from this is inconceivable.

One needs to start admitting to oneself what’s obvious right from the start—as soon as you’re born, you’re old enough to die. The second you’re conceived, you’re liable to death. And that’s it. It’s not negotiable. People might say: “You shouldn’t be thinking about this because you won’t enjoy life.” And that’s true: you won’t enjoy life in an unwholesome sense anymore. However, you will certainly appreciate it in a new wholesome way—as a possibility for developing wisdom that can free you from death. As a possibility for doing good, and even showing others who are willing to learn. There is still plenty you can do in this life within the context of death, that won’t be as futile as simply distracting yourself from the obvious truths or endlessly pursuing sensuality.

As frightening as this type of contemplation might be, you need to be developing yourself regarding that which scares you. Because understanding something requires you to stop running away from it first.

**Q: The Buddha said in AN 6:20 that a monk should think:  
“There are many possible causes for my death. A snake might bite me, a scorpion might sting me, a centipede might bite me. That would be how my death would come about. That would be an obstruction for me. Stumbling, I might fall; my food, digested, might trouble me; my bile might be provoked, my phlegm… piercing wind forces might be provoked. That would be how my death would come about. That would be an obstruction for me.’ Then the monk should investigate: ‘Are there any evil, unskilful qualities unabandoned by me that would be an obstruction for me were I to die in the night?’ If, on reflecting, he realizes that there are evil, unskilful qualities unabandoned by him that would be an obstruction for him were he to die in the night, then he should put forth extra desire, effort, diligence, endeavor, relentlessness, mindfulness, alertness for the abandoning of those very same evil, unskillful qualities.”**

**Nm:** He thinks these things to re-evoke the context of “I am susceptible to die at any given moment.” Having established that context, he doesn’t need to keep thinking about it because now, whatever he does, that context is maintained in the background. He is _feeling it_.

Mindfulness, when properly developed, is on the level of knowledge. It means that whatever thing is present in your experience, the context is also there, present as _knowledge_. And that’s why mindfulness, memory and recollection go hand-in-hand. It’s not a mechanical focusing technique that you do on account of different meditation ‘objects’—it’s the knowledge of the context regarding any situation you are in.

I think Ajahn Chah gave a similar example. It’s like a mother who has to do work outside and leaves her baby in the house. So, she’s out there only for the amount of time required to finish the work. She doesn’t linger, she doesn’t forget about her baby, she doesn’t distract herself from it. It means whatever she’s doing, she still maintains the importance of that certain context. And when she’s done, she returns to the baby. It’s the same with the development of mind, the development of mindfulness—you keep the context in mind as though it were your precious child.

“Why would I then be breaking the precepts, why would I then be careless, when I might die within 10 seconds? My heart might stop”. Then you might think: “It probably won’t.” But it _might_. That’s more than enough for that right type of concern to arise. You could go as far as to say that the _entire_ Noble Eightfold Path is predicated upon developing the _Right concern_. That’s what the Buddha meant when he said: “I’m only teaching suffering and freedom from it.” That means you need to know how to see suffering properly—the Right concern, the Right displeasure. The nature of recognizing that it’s not a choice, and it’s not negotiable either. It cannot be compared to other concerns, it’s more fundamental than anything.

To practice mindfulness of death, make sure your virtue is unbroken. Practice sense restraint. And then just sit quietly and think, for example, about your beating heart or your breathing lungs. Don’t negate anything—there’s nothing to negate. Just be aware that you are breathing now, but you might not be able to. That your entire life depends on your heart continuing to beat, yet you have no say in it. Then _endure_ that recognition.

**Q: You could think, “how is it possible for me to die, or how is the possibility of death present?”**

**Nm:** You might have to start like that. But you don’t want to merely find an intellectual answer to that. You want to _feel_ a sense of concern. That’s when you recognize that it’s that concern that needs to be developed. It must not be distracted from, must not be covered up, must not be ignored. You must not be trying to get rid of it either. It’s establishing the concern, the context of death and then allowing it to endure.

**Q: Therefore, just as a contemplation, whatever you’re doing, try to see that possibility of death therein. Like, I’m sitting now, so how could death come to me? I could fall off my chair and hit my head.**

**Nm:** Sure, I understand what you’re saying, but the point I’m making is that you can do that only initially before it becomes that mechanical visualization of how you might die. When things become mechanical and impersonal, there will be no underlying concern for your life that you are after. That’s why you can’t just be focused on what you’re going to think—you have to focus on that emotional background of being liable to death, in which case you don’t even need to think particularly “I will die because my heart will stop, or I’ll fall off the chair”. You just need to think “I will die; I could die,” and you already _feel_ that.

**Q: It’s basically about ‘picking up the sign’.**

**Nm:** Picking up the sign, exactly. The theme, the context, the peripheral knowledge of the actual possibilities of death. And that’s going to be initially an unpleasant concern. Afterwards, the displeasure of that concern disappears because you will stop resisting it through the contemplation of its inevitability. You might be apprehensive, but none of that would become full blown fear and dread and pain at the prospect of death. Why? Because you’re not as intoxicated with life as you were before. And you are not as intoxicated because you stopped maintaining the intoxication, that was maintained through ignoring the concern about the life that’s liable to death. So yes, if you want to do meditation on death, think about your beating heart—you can feel it beating—but can you have any intentional say in it? You realize, no. If this thing stops—in the same sense that a branch falls, a cup gets knocked over—the heart stops. You realize the heart is on the level of these random things in the world that can just change because of the elements, because of the wind, because of whatever. But if that does happen, my life is over. So, my entire life—my sense of mastery, my sense of control— depends on something as silly as a cup being knocked over, a valve just going ‘boop’. A pump just ceasing to pump or getting blocked.

If the pump gets blocked for 10 seconds, that might be enough to kill me. And it is inconceivable to have a say in that.

That’s why, if your virtue and sense restraint are unbroken, you will not be overwhelmed by fear and anxiety. As you persevere through it, and fully maintain this context, dispassion will be the inevitable result—Arahantship. Full Awakening, through abandoning life before it abandons you. “Die before you die,” as Ajahn Chah used to say.

**Q: “When covered, it rains too much; When uncovered, it does not rain too much. Therefore, uncover the cover, thus it will not rain too much.”—Thag 6:13, 447.**

**Nm:** You will get more affected by the rain if you fear it. Even if you don’t get wet, the fear of getting wet is already soaking you. And it same goes for death. A person who never allows themselves to think about their own death and feel the weight of it, is a person that gets “affected” by that death more.

So you’re going to get affected by death, or even by anything unpleasant, for as long as you’re covering things up from yourself. All these truths are there, obvious in a way, but you need to make the effort of undoing the cover-up for them to be discerned. So, it’s not like finding a new way out, it’s basically just stopping of covering up what’s obvious. The certainty of death, the certainty of non-control, the certainty of change.

If you want to meditate on it, set aside half an hour or whatever you have without any distractions, think about your liability to death until you develop that context that slightly (or not so slightly) concerns you, and then just allow it to endure. If you’re thinking, “What do I do next?” Nothing. All you do is make sure that this context remains transparent for this half hour that you’re meditating, nothing else. So, if your thoughts start coming, you let them, while you still keep a corner of your eye on that context. If you go away and realize you forgot, then you go back to the context. And again, just let your mind start going again, but not losing sight of the context. That’s the practice of mindfulness that results in _sammādiṭṭhi_, which then feeds mindfulness—because you’re learning how to not forget about the context, even when other things are happening, and that’s life. So, whatever’s happening in your day-to-day life, then you still have that context at the back of your mind. That is the unshakeable mindfulness that is the proper _maraṇasati_.

Whether you’re eating, breathing in, breathing out, the context remains at the back, and you’ve not lost connection with it. It doesn’t mean you must have it all the time in front of you, quite the opposite. It means you should be able to go as far as you want, but you still don’t completely lose sight of it.

If you think “have I lost sight of it?”, then check if there’s greed, aversion, or delusion in your mind—is there desire for distraction, carelessness, sensuality, ill will, anger? If yes, then you did lose the sight. Because when you’re rooted in the context, these things cannot arise. Amidst sensuality, amidst irritable things, they can’t arise, because they require passion which is incompatible with the mindfulness of death. Passion requires ignorance of the fact that this is all subject to certain destruction—but if you don’t ignore that anymore, it means you can’t engage in passion anymore.

That’s what the Buddha meant when he said those people who are not mindful—as in those who are not aware of that context—are as if dead already. They’re fully under that weight of death. The only way to not partake in it, to not be affected by it, is to fully understand that context of death. So, by being unmindful, you’re fully subscribed, fully covered up, fully cocooned in that liability of certain death. It means you’re as if dead—it doesn’t matter if it’s in five minutes or fifty years.

The true meaning of life would be to find that which is not permeable by death. That which is not subject to it.

Hence, mindfulness is the path to the deathless—peripheral awareness of that context will take you out of the confinement of it, through understanding. You’re going to give up passion, any appropriation, any relationship with it—with everything that’s liable to death, which your experience as a whole, your life, past, future—all of it. It’s all about removing the emotional connection and appropriation of it. And you will know you’re removing it, because if you think about losing your life there will be no concern arising any more.

**Q: There’s also an idea that one must practice so that when death happens, one will be able to control it in a nice way.**

**Nm:** Yes, that’s what I meant with what I was describing before. For people that are so used to just focusing on what’s in front of them, they think if they just learn the art of focusing, regardless of what the nature of the things they’re focusing on is, when death comes in front of them, they’ll be able to attend it rightly. But it’s not about attending to what’s in front of you, it’s about _knowing_ what’s simultaneously “behind” you while you are attending to this or that.

If you want to practice towards not being affected by the experience of death when it comes, you start practising towards not being affected by any experience in this life, even now. So, ask yourself: “Am I affected by the arisen desires of sensuality, or ill will, or distraction, or carelessness? Yes, I’m affected by it. If these worldly things affect me and move me so much, how can I expect to be unmoved in the face of death when it comes?” Impossible!

So, that’s then your job: training to not be affected by anything that pressures you, agreeable or disagreeable. The only way you won’t be affected by death is if life itself stops affecting you.

**Q: Whatever arises, it arises within a context.**

**Nm:** There’s always a context, yes. To everything, internally, there’s a context, which is why people spend most of their time covering it up because it always reveals that which you don’t necessarily want to see. Or rather, it takes time and effort to be able to get used to seeing it and then not suffer on account of it. That’s why one’s life, the entire _saṃsāra_, and the whole of sensuality goes with the grain—it’s effortless to turn a blind eye, it’s effortless to engage with sensuality. So, you need to start making the effort to pull yourself out of it, and then you will be able to appreciate sense restraint, solitude, non-distraction, non-ill will. You won’t naturally value those things. Effort and wisdom are against the nature. Nature which tries to keep you under its thumb of mortality.

That’s what meditation is, whatever your object of it might be. Developing the same principle: the peripheral enduring context that becomes imperturbable regarding things that are within it. Or “inferior to it” as the Suttas would say. Things that are actually presenting themselves. That’s why the Buddha said: “He establishes his mind in the divine abiding of the _jhāna_ and—whether he sits, walks, urinates, defecates, eats—his mind is established in that state,” because all these activities are “inferior” to his context.

**Q: You don’t create death.**

**Nm:** No, that’s the whole point. In the same sense, you don’t create the Dhamma. Even the Buddha said it’s just an ancient path that was covered and he uncovered it. He didn’t create anything—it’s just the discernment of these universal truths. Therefore, that’s what meditation should be revolving around—it doesn’t matter if you do it for fifteen minutes or for five hours. Establish your mind upon the greater context that is an infertile basis for any passion and ill will—that cannot exist in that context. And then you let that context endure until your mind gets established in it. And you know your mind is established in it when you cannot be passionate, you cannot be affected by the arisen feeling, pleasant, unpleasant or neutral. And then you also know, when you’re about to do something, if it’s going to make you more firmly established in that context, or it’s going to take you away from it. The choice becomes much clearer: “This is unwholesome, this is wholesome.” Unwholesome means it takes you away from the wholesome context. Wholesome means it keeps you within the wholesome context.

**Q: In line with the truth.**

**Nm:** Yes, within that domain, your actions do not contradict it, they don’t abolish it, they don’t drag you down from it. That’s why Devadatta, once he started engaging in unwholesome acts, was unable to keep his mind in _jhāna_. It wasn’t some magical energy that got trapped or evaporated. It’s just that unwholesomeness contradicts the domain of it.

If you choose to engage in it, you choose to then forsake this: the greater context. And the only way to develop the greater context is to keep discerning it, keep thinking about it, keep trying to establish it, allowing it to endure. Not trying to get rid of it just because it might feel unpleasant. That’s why you can’t crave for it either. You can’t crave for _jhāna_. You can’t crave for the imperturbable, wholesome _samādhi_ because craving is always toward the actual experience. Not the context of it. Feeling in regard to the actual thing—that’s what you crave for. But this is the context of it, and now your mind is established in that, which means your mind then becomes unreachable by any craving. So, if people want to know how to make this context endure, you don’t do it, you can’t make it endure—because that’s like you’re still trying to make it ‘in front of you’. So, you make it endure by stopping trying to make it endure. You make it endure by thinking about it, but by not interfering with it either. In the same sense as the example we gave of the appointment—the life-changing appointment you have—you don’t need to make it endure. It’s already there. All you need to do is to stop distracting yourself from it.

**Q: You can’t cancel the appointment.**

**Nm:** No, you cannot. So, you realize the recognition of that is already a form of endurance, even if you don’t necessarily feel fully concerned about it. Still, you are aware of the context that whatever you do, it’s going to end, all of it. It can end even before you realize it will end. Your beating heart right now can stop. Allow that thought to endure—don’t overthink it, don’t give in to fear of it—just allow it to endure. And then see other things that appear in your mind against the endurance of that thought—because you’re not looking for a specific answer of “This is how it is” or “This is how it will be.” You’re looking for the evoking of the context of being liable to death—that’s how you create that connection.

So, while I’m sitting here, secluded from unwholesomeness, secluded from distraction, what if this beating muscle in my chest were to stop? Don’t answer it, don’t provide an excuse or an explanation, just allow that question to sink in. What if it were to stop? And then the mind will think about it, but all that is secondary, still allow just the question to endure. Then the thought comes, “my heart will stop.” Allow that to endure. Then your timer rings, your meditation is finished. OK, fine, but you realize that context still hasn’t changed. You go about your duties and you still have that context enduring, and you will forget it only when you engage in unwholesomeness—lust, aversion or delusion.

That’s why you need to meditate in this manner as much as you can until that context becomes imperturbable. You will also see that you need a basis of sense restraint, physical restraint, as a guardian for not losing that context. And then your bodily behaviour, speech, or mental behaviour doesn’t take you as far back into the unwholesomeness, and therefore you won’t have to undo it as much. Hence, virtue comes first. It’s necessary.

If the context is enduring—you still haven’t forgotten that your beating heart might stop, that you’re fundamentally liable to death, you have a degree of concern—you might think what do I do now? Well, you include the thought of “What do I do now?” against that context, and you realize you don’t do anything, you don’t need to do anything.

Is the context still there? Yes.

Whatever might happen to me, would it be against the backdrop of that context? Yes.

Whatever I might do with my life, immediately or in the future, is this context changeable? No.

So, are my engagements with life or with people worthy—against this context, in this new light of the new context? Is it worth it to be so emotionally disturbed by not getting what you want? Not really.

If you’re in that context, being affected by things such as sensuality becomes inconceivable. So all you need to do is find ways of maintaining the context, regardless of whether you’re sitting in a protected meditation environment or not. Hence seated, walking, lying down, extending your arms, eating, urinating, defecating, whatever you do, you maintain the context, day and night. To the extent necessary for obliterating any ground for passion to manifest again. All passion. And that’s the meditation “object” of death.
