

---
lang: en
layout: post
category: books
author: Ajahn Nyanamoli Thero
title: Intentions Behind Actions
---


### INTENTIONS BEHIND ACTIONS

The Right meditation is determined by the Right view.

> “The Blessed One said: Now what, monks, is noble right meditation with its supports & requisite conditions? Any singleness of mind equipped with these seven factors—right view, right resolve, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, & right mindfulness—is called noble right meditation with its supports & requisite conditions.  
> Therein, bhikkhus, right view _comes first_. And how does the right view come first? One understands wrong view as wrong view and right view as right view: this is one’s right view.”  
> —MN 117

That means that even if a person doesn’t have the Right view, their meditation should be concerned about getting it. And that is done by developing the self-transparency (or self-honesty) concerning skilful/good states of mind (_kusala_) and unskilful/bad ones (_akusala_).

The Buddha defined the Right view in those very terms—knowing “good as good”, and “bad as bad”. The person with the Right view knows for himself, beyond any doubt, _kusala_ as _kusala_ and _akusala_ as _akusala_. By seeing it—he recognizes it. He doesn’t need to hold or adopt any other external criteria. The clarity of his vision pertains to here-and-now, internally. Thus, for someone who hasn’t achieved that yet, that’s where the meditation should start. The obtaining of the right criteria and then meditating through it. Keeping it “composed” is the definition of the Right _samādhi_.

The problem is that this kind of instruction is very non-specific. People today usually need something more relatable. They require meditation “methods” and “techniques”. An average man today wants a “recipe”, a prescription of “steps” for his meditation. He wants to be _told what to do_. He wishes to know what _exactly_ he should perform, that would then automatically result in his liberation. Unfortunately, it doesn’t work like that. If we look at the Suttas, whenever the Buddha was talking about meditation it was to bring the fulfilment of knowledge and wisdom. Yet, if a person has none of the latter to begin with, then the fulfilment cannot arise nor be fabricated mechanically. Very often the Buddha’s reply on how to meditate would be in instructing people in recognizing and avoiding the unskilful, and cultivating (_bhāvanā_) the skilful. Discerning the nature of _kusala_ and _akusala_ has the potential of taking the mind above both. Freeing it from action (_kamma_) and its results (_vipāka_). And that’s exactly why performing (_doing_ or _acting_) the specific steps cannot take one _beyond_ the nature of _kamma_. Understanding it, however, might.

On a more practical level, methods and techniques are inadequate because usually they don’t amount to more than _management_ of the problem of suffering. Management of a problem is not the same as _uprooting_ it. That’s why a person will be better off trying to discern what kind of attitude towards meditation can be sustained throughout the day that would eventually uproot or _prevent_ one from being able to suffer _in the first place_. An attitude that wouldn’t need any particular favourable environment or special conditions to be applied. Regardless of whether one is sitting in a full lotus posture, or just walking down the street. One needs to find that kind of _composure_ that one can maintain in different circumstances. The way to do this is by establishing the _general mindfulness_. Not the particular observation and adherence to the prescribed steps of a “meditation” technique, that results in one being absorbed in it. But the opposite: awareness of one’s general situation as a whole (e.g. an enduring mood, state of mind, persisting feeling etc.). Common practice of “absorption” can then be seen as the complete opposite of this type of general mindfulness.

Every _jhāna_, for example, is fully founded upon the basis of the unshakeable mindfulness as a number of Suttas often mention. So, even if a person wants to do his meditation in a “formal” manner, such as sit for an hour a few times a day, that is fine. As long as it is not done for the purpose of developing some sort of “experience of absorption” out of it. Like trying to watch one’s breath hoping for some novelty energy release or pleasures. The point of meditation is to remain _aware_ as much as possible. Aware or mindful of _whatever_ is already there _enduring_ (feeling, perception, intentions). Not interfere with it, or deny it, or try to replace it. Just discerning the enduring presence of the arisen experience. Emotionally, perceptually and intentionally. That kind of composure can then be “spread out” over one’s entire day, even when a person is not sitting down to meditate. (Which is what the Buddha said for _jhāna_ too—one can sit, walk, eat, go to toilet, etc., while in _jhāna_. Very contrary to the popular belief.)

And this should not be too hard to grasp (though that doesn’t mean it will be easy to accept). The whole point of the practice of Dhamma and meditation is nothing other than understanding the nature of things. The understanding that arises on account of the mindful discerning of whatever is _arisen_ and _enduring_ in our experience. And it’s that understanding of the unskilful that frees the mind from it. If a person wants to be truly free once and for all, the only way to do so is through knowledge and mindfulness.

Thus, if one wants to practice in a manner that pertains to this final goal of freedom, one needs to become very mindful and honest about the intentions behind any actions. Simple actions, more complex ones, careless or important, big or small—actions of any kind done by body, speech or mind. One will need to attend to them mindfully until the motivations and intentions behind them are fully seen. That is because it is the intention that defines skilful action as skilful and unskilful as unskilful. It defines the “reason” for one’s action, so to speak. That’s where the skilfulness of an action is rooted in. That’s also the _real_ reason, the one deep inside that one might not be willing to admit to oneself. If a person is able to reach the full transparency of one’s intentional actions and its roots, that person is a step closer in discerning what makes _kusala_, _kusala_ and _akusala_, _akusala_. That person is a step closer to the beginning of the Right view.

So, if one wishes to meditate, one needs to be concerned with one’s actions and choices. (Which is also why _silā_ or virtue comes before the Dhamma.) In such manner any motivation for one’s intentions behind doing this or that will be revealed and not taken at its face value. Through this persistent self-questioning one can also see whether an action that is about to be, is rooted in an unskilful motive. Like sensuality, ill will, vanity or distraction for example.

What’s important is that one would need to abandon only that: _the unskilful_. One doesn’t need to cancel the entire arisen experience and behaviour. That would be a form of overdoing it, and not using mindfulness as a criterion of discernment. “Is what I am about to do rooted in greed? Lust? How about ill will and annoyance or anger?” Or “am I acting out of a desire for distraction and forgetfulness? Am I willingly giving in to acts and desires that would delude me further and mask the unskilful basis of those very actions?” Such questioning about the personal and inner dimension of one’s daily experiences and actions will _have to_ result in being mindful. This is a definition of (proper) _vipassanā_, or investigation, since that’s exactly what’s being done. Self investigating the motivation behind any actions. And it is obvious to see how this kind of attitude and mindful practice would result in discerning “good as good, bad as bad”. How it would not be dependent on any external authority or belief. Instead it would be a direct, visible, universal criterion seen personally for oneself.

It’s important to note it is not necessary that one becomes neurotic or obsessed (though it might happen) about it. Always having to _actually_ ask oneself “What am I doing?” before every action. What’s important is the _attitude_ of such questioning. The “answer” is already implied within it. One already _knows_ why one is acting. (Whether one is aware of it or not, that’s a different matter.) Of course, until that attitude is developed and refined, a person will have to endure the possible loss of (superficial) confidence and go through choice paralysis. That’s because the implications of one’s smallest actions are becoming more revealed. A person starts to feel responsible even for things that are not in his control.

So, through this kind of “revealing” of the roots of one’s actions, one is simultaneously becoming less and less able to ignore one’s true intentions. One will not be able to turn a blind eye towards acting good while the real motivation underneath it isn’t necessarily so. That’s why this attitude is “self-transparent”. Whatever is on the surface, one simultaneously sees _beneath it_ as well.

It should be clear by now that self-honesty or transparency is not an optional thing (or just one of different ways leading to the same goal). It’s an absolute pre-requisite for any chance of getting the Right view and knowing how to practice the Dhamma. If a person still has difficulties in abandoning his own dependence upon a particular “method” of practice, he can still take up this practice of self-questioning all the time, as a “method”. Although not ideal, it will still result in seeing through the motivation and emotional need for any methods in the first place. (Needing “something to do”.) By seeing the subtle motivation under _any_ action, one will automatically feel responsible for one’s choices. No matter how “justified” those might seem externally. The weight on it is always on oneself, and that’s something that one cannot ignore any further.

It is also then when the full weight of the Buddha’s “beings are owners of their actions” saying is truly felt:

> “I am the owner of my actions, heir to actions, born of actions, related to my actions, and I have actions as my shelter. Whatever I do, for good or for evil, to that will I become the heir.”  
> —AN 5:57
